Title: IRIS-HEP funded
date: 2018-09-01
Authors: Kyle Cranmer
Category: Blog
Tags: funding
Slug: iris-hep
Summary: IRIS-HEP Funded
 
In a follow up to [DIANA/HEP](http://diana-hep.org), the [NSF has funded](https://www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.jsp?cntn_id=296456&org=NSF&from=news) the Institute for Research and [Innovation in Software in High Energy Physics (IRIS-HEP)](http://iris-hep.org). IRIS-HEP is a software institute that aims to develop the state-of-the-art software cyberinfrastructure required for the challenges of data intensive scientific research at the High Luminosity Large Hadron Collider (HL-LHC) at CERN, and other planned HEP experiments of the 2020’s. These facilities are discovery machines which aim to understand the fundamental building blocks of nature and their interactions. 

Kyle Cranmer is part of the [Executive Board](http://iris-hep.org/about/team), will lead the Analysis Systems group, and participate in the Innovative Algorithms group. IRIS-HEP will support a postdoc and a  applications developer at NYU.

- - - 
<div class="row">
  <div class="col-md-6">
<iframe src='//players.brightcove.net/679256133001/NkgrDczuol_default/index.html?videoId=5828455297001' allowfullscreen frameborder=0></iframe>
</div>
  <div class="col-md-6">
<iframe src='//players.brightcove.net/679256133001/NkgrDczuol_default/index.html?videoId=5828466797001' allowfullscreen frameborder=0></iframe>
</div>
</div>

- - - 

The Institute for Research and Innovation in Software for High Energy Physics (IRIS-HEP) has been established to meet the software and computing challenges of the HL-LHC, through R&D for the software for acquiring, managing, processing and analyzing HL-LHC data. IRIS-HEP will address key elements of the [“Roadmap for HEP Software and Computing R&D for the 2020s”](https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.06982) and will implement the [“Strategic Plan for a Scientific Software Innovation Institute (S2I2) for High Energy Physics”](https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.06592) submitted to the NSF in December 2017. These two documents represent, respectively, the outcome of international and U.S. HEP community planning processes; these were driven in part by the NSF-funded [S2I2-HEP Institute Conceptualization Project](http://s2i2-hep.org/).

IRIS-HEP will serve as an active center for software R&D, function as an intellectual hub for the larger community-wide software R&D efforts, and transform the operational services required to ensure the success of the HL-LHC scientific program. Three high-impact R&D areas will leverage the talents of the U.S. university community:

  * development of **innovative algorithms** for data reconstruction and triggering;
  * development of highly performant **analysis systems** that reduce `time-to-insight’ and maximize the HL-LHC physics potential; and
  * development of data organization, management and access systems (**DOMA**) for the community’s upcoming Exabyte era.

As an intellectual hub, IRIS-HEP will lead efforts to:

 * grow research collaborations between HEP and the Cyberinfrastructure, Data Science and Computer Science communities for novel approaches to the compelling HL-LHC challenges,
 * bring in new effort from U.S. Universities emphasizing professional development and training, and
 * sustain HEP software and underlying knowledge related to the algorithms and their implementations over the two decades required.

